@def title = "Biological Networks"

# Biological Networks

Biochemical networks, representing the molecular-level patterns of interaction and control in the biological cell, have attracted a significant amount of attention in recent years. The best studied examples are metabolic networks, protein– protein interaction networks, and genetic regulatory networks.

An application of network ideas in medicine is the disease network of Barabási et al. which represents human diseases that have a genetic component. In this network the nodes represent diseases and there is an edge between two diseases if the same gene has been implicated in both. The result is a network in which related diseases, such as different forms of cancer, cluster together.

A completely different use of networks in biology arises in the study of the brain and central nervous system in animals. Two broad classes of brain networks are studied: microscopic networks of connections between individual brain cells and macroscopic networks of functional connection between entire brain regions. At the simplest level, a neuron can be thought of as a unit that accepts a number of inputs, either excitatory or inhibiting, combines them, and generates an output that is sent to one or more further neurons. In network terms, a neural network can thus be represented as a set of nodes—the neurons—connected by two types of directed edges, one for excitatory inputs and one for inhibiting inputs

A different class of brain networks are networks of macroscopic functional connectivity between large-scale regions of the brain. The structure of these macroscopic networks can shed light on the logical or- ganization of the brain—how information processing occurs or how different processes are interlinked—while avoiding the microscopic details of connec- tion between individual brain cells. The combination of diffusion MRI and functional MRI together has, in recent years, allowed researchers to develop sophisticated maps of large-scale networks within both human and animal brains

The final class of biological networks that we consider in this chapter is networks of ecological interaction between species. They can eat one another, they can para- sitize one another, they can compete for resources, or they can have mutually advantageous interactions, such as pollination or seed dispersal. In principle, interactions of all of these types could be represented simultaneously in a combined interaction network (perhaps a multilayer network—see Section 6.7). Traditionally, however, ecologists have separated interaction types into different networks. Networks of predator–prey interactions (i.e., who eats whom) have a particularly long history of study. Networks of hosts and parasites or of mutualistic interactions are less well studied, but have received some attention in recent years.

A food web is a directed network that represents which species prey on which others in a given ecosystem.6 The nodes in the network correspond to species and the directed edges to predator–prey interactions. If a set of species such as birds all prey upon and are preyed on by the same other species, then the network can be simplified by representing them as a single node, without losing any information about who preys on whom. note the direction of the edges in the network. One might imagine that the edges would point from predators to prey, but ecologists conventionally draw them in the opposite direction, from prey to predator. Thus the edge representing the eating of fish by birds runs from the fish node to the bird node. The reason for this apparently odd choice is that ecologists view food webs as representations of the flow of energy (or sometimes carbon) within ecosystems. The acyclic nature of food webs indicates that there is an intrinsic pecking order among the species in ecosystems.
